## INFO 656 - Machine Learning <br> Fall 2022 <br> Final Project Proposal <br> Erin Murphy
__________________________________


### Project Topic
I have an interest in dream interpretation and thought this project could be an opportunity to apply a machine learning task to analyze dream data. I identified a [dataset](https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.5061/dryad.qbzkh18fr) that contains transcriptions of 20k+ dream reports in text format. Each dream in the dataset also has been coded using a quantitative system developed by psychologists for the purpose of content analysis. I would like to use both the text and coding system to train a model that can classify a dream using the elements reported in it.
### Description of data
For my project I plan to use a [dataset](https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.5061/dryad.qbzkh18fr) containing dream reports that was used by researchers who wrote a paper titled [Our dreams, our selves: automatic analysis of dream reports](https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.5061/dryad.qbzkh18fr). The researchers sourced the dream data, a collection of 20k+ dream reports, from [dreambank.net](http://www.dreambank.net). The dataset contains journal-like text accounts of dreams from a number of individuals that have been coded using the [Hall/Van de Castle dream coding system](https://dreams.ucsc.edu/Coding/). This system was developed by psychologists as a method for doing quantitative content analysis on dreams. It assigns quantitative values to several dream elements: characters (male/female, animal, family, etc), aggression or friendliness of interactions, negative/positive emotions. The dataset also includes information on the dreamers’ profiles and dates of dreams. Some dreamers are given anonymized descriptive names such as vietnam_vet and natural_scientist, while others are identified by real names such as Nancy and Toby. The researchers who provided the dataset designed a NLP tool that scores the dream reports using the Hall/Van de Castle coding system to test the ‘continuity hypothesis’, which is that dreams are a continuation of what happens in everyday life.
### ML Task
Based on my preliminary research, it appears that using Naive Bayes methods, a set of supervised learning algorithms, would be the best approach to train a model to classify text-based dream data. I’ve been reviewing the different approaches to classifying text data via Scikit-Learn and I will continue to explore this further. Note: ultimately I decided to use Random Forest for text classification.
### Brief survey of existing work
In my search for dream datasets, I came across many interesting projects. [The Shape of Dreams](https://the-shape-of-dreams.com/) is a data visualization project that uses a dataset of the most common Google searches about dreams. The visualization presents an analysis of common themes in dreams (e.g. teeth falling out) and the connections made over different languages, timelines, etc. [Pandemic Dreams: Network Analysis of Dream Content During the COVID-19 Lockdown](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.573961/full) uses the study's own crowdsourced data to identify “bad dream clusters”, which were common themes in nightmares of the study participants during the COVID-19 lockdown.
### Significance of topic
Many people struggle to interpret their dreams and the meaning of various symbols or elements. Creating a tool that codes specific elements of dreams can present an opportunity to highlight significant themes that may provide insight into an individual dreamer’s unconscious. The tool could also be used to analyze dream trends over certain time periods, historic events, and geographical locations to perhaps provide insight into the collective unconscious under certain circumstances. 

As a final point, I am interested and concerned about the potential privacy and other ethical implications of this tool, as well as how they relate to the provenance of the dataset I am using. I think it’s something worth exploring more.
